Spec reference relationships (#1206)
matrix-org/matrix-spec: content/client-server-api/modules/reference_relations.md

---
type: module
---

### Reference relations

{{% added-in v="1.4" %}}

Generically referencing another event can be done with a `rel_type` of `m.reference`
as a form of [relationship](#forming-relationships-between-events). There is no
implied meaning behind the reference, and is usually context-dependent. Such an

> example is the [key verification framework](#key-verification-framework) which uses

Author: applied manually

reference relations to associate distinct events with a specific verification attempt.

> When bundled, a reference relations appear as an object with a `chunk` field to

Reviewer: s/bundled/aggregated/ ? with a link to https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#aggregations ?

Reviewer: Also s/field/property/ per https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/blob/main/meta/documentation_style.rst#general.

```suggestion
The aggregation format of `m.reference` relations consists of a single `chunk` property to
```

Author: > s/bundled/aggregated/ ? with a link to https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#aggregations ?

The MSC says bundled and I was hoping that would magically fit in our spec language 😭

> The aggregation format of `m.reference` relations consists of a single `chunk` property to
> indicate all the events which `m.reference` the event (the parent). Currently,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aggregation format of `m.reference` relations consists of a single `chunk` property, which
lists all the events which `m.reference` the event (the parent). Currently,
```

Author: applied manually

> only a single `event_id` field is present on the events in the `chunk`.

Reviewer 2: There's also potentially a `next_batch` token to pass back into `/relations` to get more?

This seems to be at this discussion which was never resolved in the MSC: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3267#discussion_r883541312

Author: I'd be inclined to intentionally punt that to a new MSC rather than backport it into MSC3267, I think. There's some questions about how it would work that start to feel like MSC-needing territory, like what if there's no more at the time the bundle is made or how long the server needs to keep the token valid for.

Author: Also, in practice clients *should* receive the follow-up events in most cases because they'll get the bundle from `/sync` and then be actively syncing again. There's a chance that they'll go offline again and create a gap, but backfill should repopulate the client's stores for local aggregation, or the event will be old enough where new references aren't necessarily important (for the current usecases in the spec, at least).

Reviewer 2: That all sounds reasonable...but if we're not going to spec it, we should stop returning it from synapse (but I have no idea if clients are depending on it).

Author: I'd be comfortable removing it from Synapse tbh - it doesn't seem all that important to clients, but equally I am unsure if there's anyone out there using it (if they are, they can write an MSC imo)

Reviewer 2: OK, we should file a Synapse issue at the very least then!

> only a single `event_id` field is present on the events in the `chunk`.

Reviewer: I think it would be nice if this and the example aggregation should be grouped together under a "Server-side aggregation of `m.reference` relationships" heading, for consistency with edits.

{{% boxes/note %}}
Clients which wish to use threads or replies are expected to use other relationship
types than references. References are typically used to associate data rather than
messages.
{{% /boxes/note %}}

An example `m.reference` would be:

```json
{
  "content": {
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.reference",
      "event_id": "$another_event"
    }
    // other content fields as required
  }
  // other fields as required by events
}
```

> The [bundle](#aggregations) under `m.relations` would appear similar to the following:

Reviewer: s/bundle/aggregation/ ?

Author: I think this is a bundle, in reference to the same language `m.replace` uses.

> ```json5

Author: ```suggestion
```json
```
